An Adornment for the Ear to Delight Those of Sharp Intelligence: Notes to Remember the Oral Instructions of the Sublime Noble Masters An Explanation of Madhyamaka, the Bodhisattva Path, and Meditation A Presentation of the Four Great Arguments Upheld by the Mādhyamikas First, through the vajra splinters argument, the object of refutation is refuted via an analysis of the cause of the object of refutation. The subject, a mere entity, is ultimately something that has not arisen from itself, another, both, or without cause, and as such is empty of all entities that arise. This is analogous, for instance, to a mere object-universal being devoid of entities. The refutation of arising for the existent and nonexistent is a refutation via analysis of the result of the object of refutation. Because the subject, these dependently originating appearances, is ultimately empty of the following three-the result existing at the time of the cause, not existing, and arising-it is thus empty of any given existent or nonexistent result arising from a cause, and empty of all entities that arise. This is analogous, for instance, to an entity that, despite its absence, is nevertheless illustrated by way of its specific nature. The refutation of the four possibilities of arising is a refutation via analysis of both cause and result. Appearances as such are ultimately empty of the four possibilities of arising: the arising of a single corresponding result from a single cause, multiple results from a single cause, multiple results from multiple causes, and a single result from multiple causes. This is analogous, for instance, to applying the designation "space" in the absence of an entity. The argument of great dependent origination is twofold. As to that arranged as an argument of affirming negation-great dependent origination, a refutation via analysis of individual essences-that which dependently originates is free from the eight extremes of arising, cessation, and so forth, and is therefore empty of a real inherent nature. Unimpeded as mere dependent origination, it appears just as, for example, a flickering mirage. As to that arranged as an argument of non-affirming negation-the neither singular nor multiple-if we take a given mere existent entity, it is ascertained when by virtue of the simple negation of it being a multiple entity it is found to be singular, that is, it exists as a singular entity. Once it is explicitly determined that a mere existent entity is pervaded by existing as either singular or multiple, this will rule out the possibility of any doubt to the effect that this very existent entity, which is perceived to be what is pervaded by singularity and multiplicity, is not pervaded by its being singular or multiple even were it an ultimate entity. As such, by way of determining the relevant defining properties, there is an implicit establishment of the pervasion of ultimate entities by singularity and multiplicity. The Assertion of the Great Madhyamaka of Definitive Meaning That All Phenomena Are Subsumed within Three Defining Characteristics First is the presentation of the imagined. This is identified as those conceptions pertaining to the dual factors of perceived and perceiver, which are persistently imputed by mistaken consciousnesses that conceive the six objects of form and so on and the six sensory faculties-phenomena and individuals-to exist as entities. If we consider its semantic etymology, it is parisamatādā, that is, "wholly"-for instance, superimposed in respect to the nonexistent. The imagined has two divisions: the manifest imagined-the apprehended and apprehender of objects and sensory faculties-and the unmanifest imagined-rabbit horns, the son of a barren woman, what is viewed as a self by non-Buddhists, and the subtle particles upheld by the hearers. Second is the presentation of the other-dependent. This is identified as simply the all-ground consciousness and its concomitants: the momentary dependent origination of minds and mental states in the manner of causes and results. Why is it called "other-dependent"? The consciousnesses of sentient beings of the three realms are unable to arise by themselves without relying on other causes and conditions. They are thus known as "other-dependent," being produced by means of four causes and conditions. The latent tendencies present within the all-ground are the causal condition; the six collections of engaging faculties-the eye faculty and so on-are the ruling condition; and their objects-such as form, sound, smell, taste, and touch-are the condition of the focal referent. Afforded the opportunity by a previous instant of consciousness having ceased, a subsequent instant arises; the immediately preceding condition is thus. As for the other-dependent's semantic etymology, it is taught to be paratantra because it relies on other conditions and is conscious. The other-dependent has two divisions: the produced other-dependent is what emerges from the minds of sentient beings, that is, the compounded entities produced by the origin and conditions, and the relative other-dependent consists of the four uncompounded phenomena which are not produced by causes and conditions relative to that. These are comprised of investigative and non-investigative cessations, space, and suchness. Third is the presentation of the consummate. This is identified as the freedom from the duality of perceived and perceiver in all instances of that which bears that quality, namely, the other-dependent. Why is it called "consummate"? This may be illustrated by water, the sky, and gold. Whether sullied or pellucid, the natural limpid blue of water neither comes from anywhere nor goes anywhere. With respect to gold, too, whether or not it has met with the blows of a smith, its natural golden color neither goes anywhere nor comes from anywhere. And if we take the sky, whether clear or not clear, its pristine nature does not come from anywhere and neither does it go anywhere. Thus it is with the true nature, the expanse of reality-if the Buddha has taught about it in this world, it does not come from anywhere, and if he has not, nowhere does it go. As for its semantic etymology, it is pariniṣpanna, for suchness and authentic primordial wisdom, in an unchanging and unmistaken manner, are fully complete and actualized. Thus, they are consummate defining characteristics. It has two divisions: the unchanging consummate, which is the true nature of phenomena, and the unmistaken consummate, the primordial wisdom of awareness that realizes the true nature without error. Here, too, we can say that all imputations that a nonexistent entity exists are imagined; all things that arise by way of causes and conditions are other-dependent; and everything neither imputed by a mistaken mind nor produced by causes and conditions is the consummate. The Meaning of the Twenty-Two Divisions in the Bodhisattva's Generation of Bodhicitta Pertaining to the Thresholds The Ornament to Clear Realization states: Earth, gold, moon, and fire, Treasure, jewel mine, and ocean, Vajra, mountain, medicine, and spiritual companion, Wish-fulfilling gem, sun, and song; King, treasury, and highway, Steed and spring, And mellifluous sound, river, and cloud- With these, it is also of twenty-two kinds. The referents of these twenty-two analogies extend from the intent to achieve the goal to the dharmakāya, and may be connected to the five paths. (1) The generation of bodhicitta possessed of intent resembles the earth, for it forms the ground for all pure deeds; (2) that which is possessed of resolve resembles gold, for until awakening it will not change; and (3) that which is possessed of surpassing resolve is akin to the waxing moon, for all virtues will flourish. These three are included within the ground of the beginner-the lesser, middling, and greater paths of accumulation. (4) That which is possessed of application is akin to fire, for it burns away the tinder obscuring the three forms of omniscience. This is included within the path of joining. (5) That which is possessed of the perfection of generosity is like a great treasure, for it makes all sentient beings content. That which is possessed of ethical discipline is like a mine of precious jewels, for it functions as the support for the precious jewels of excellent qualities. That which is possessed of forbearance is like a great ocean, for it is undisturbed should anything undesirable come to pass. That which is possessed of diligence is like a vajra, for in its indestructibility it stands firm. That which is possessed of concentration is like the king of mountains, for it is unmoved by the distraction of a focal referent. That which is possessed of wisdom is like medicine, for it pacifies the sicknesses of the afflictions. That which is possessed of skillful means is like a virtuous spiritual companion, for the welfare of beings is not forsaken under any circumstances. That which is possessed of aspiration is like a wish-fulfilling gem, for results will be achieved precisely as one aspires. That which is possessed of strength is like the sun, for it fully ripens disciples. That which is possessed of the perfection of primordial wisdom is likened to tones of Dharma, for it teaches the Dharma that inspires disciples. Accordingly, these ten are respectively subsumed within the ten grounds of the bodhisattva, elation and so on, and fall within the purview of the path of seeing and the path of cultivation. That which is possessed of supernormal awareness is like a great king, for with irresistible power it accomplishes the benefit of others. That which is possessed of merit and primordial wisdom is like a treasury, for it is a storehouse rich in accumulations. That which is possessed of the qualities conducive to awakening is like a highway, for it has been traveled, and will yet again be traveled, by all noble ones. That which is possessed of compassion and special insight is like a steed, for one advances with ease, not falling into either saṃsāra or nirvāṇa. That which is possessed of recollection and eloquence resembles a spring, for in its retention of the Dharma, heard and unheard, it is inexhaustible. These five are thus subsumed within the special path of the bodhisattvas. That which is possessed of a pleasure grove of Dharma is like the hearing of a mellifluous sound, for it resounds so delightfully for disciples seeking liberation. That which is possessed of the singular path of traveling is like the flow of a river, for in its activities to benefit others it remains undiminished. That which is possessed of the dharmakāya resembles a cloud, for activities to benefit beings-through such displays as residing in Tuṣita and so on-depend upon it. Accordingly, these three are included within the ground of buddhahood. Thus, starting from the ground of the beginner all the way up to the ground of buddhahood, all twenty-two are subsumed. Additionally, there are four divisions in terms of the thresholds: the generation of bodhicitta possessed of conviction, that possessed of surpassing resolve, that of maturation, and that of abandoning obscurations. The first is included within the ground of practice through conviction. The second ranges from the first to the seventh grounds. The third ranges from the eighth to the tenth grounds. The fourth is the ground of buddhahood. Accordingly, these are also mentioned in the Ornament to the Mahāyāna Sūtras: Regarding that generation of bodhicitta, with reference to the grounds, There is that of conviction, pure surpassing resolve, And maturation, which is held to be distinct; Likewise, there is that of abandoning obscurations. Semantic Glosses of the Ten Bodhisattva Grounds Because one draws near to awakening and perceives the achievement of manifold beings' welfare, there is "elation." Having purified up to even subtle downfalls, one is "unstained" by corrupted ethical discipline. Because one attains an utterly pure aggregate of samādhi transcending the grounds of the hearers and self-awakened buddhas, the transformation associated with the great light of primordial wisdom, there is "illumination." Radiating the flames of the factors conducive to awakening, which burn away the afflictions, there is "radiance." Cultivation of the four truths of the noble ones, surpassing that of the hearers and self-awakened buddhas, and refinement and cultivation of what is completely purified, wisdom which does not dwell in either saṃsāra or nirvāṇa, are "exquisitely difficult." Based on the perfection of wisdom, one abides extensively in and perceives directly manifest primordial wisdom that does not abide in either saṃsāra or nirvāṇa and naturally penetrates the absence of marks. Thus, there is "manifestation." Advancing far by having drawn close to the singular path that proceeds to the absence of marks, one is "far traveled." Unable to be shaken by the distinguishing cognitions of either the existence or nonexistence of marks, one is "immovable." Having attained the correct knowledges, one's intellect is exalted above that of others. Thus, there is "excellent intelligence." Finally, because all dhāraṇīs and samādhis pervade the heard Dharma, like a cloud pervading the sky, there is a "cloud of Dharma." These grounds are connected to the whole set of the ten perfections: generosity, ethical discipline, forbearance, diligence, concentration, wisdom, skillful means, aspiration, strength, and primordial wisdom. How the Five Bodhisattva Paths Are Connected to the Thirty-Seven Qualities Since they are oriented toward the three forms of awakening, from the applications of mindfulness to the eightfold path of the noble ones, there are the thirty-seven qualities for awakening. In this regard, specific and general characteristics are investigated with wisdom, and witnessed objects are grasped with clarity by means of mindfulness. Since it is mindfulness that predominates, these are the four applications of mindfulness. Mindfulness of the body contemplates the objects of impermanence, suffering, and absence of self; mindfulness of sensations contemplates pleasant, unpleasant, and neutral sensations; mindfulness of the mind contemplates the eight collections of consciousness; and mindfulness of phenomena examines the objects of the afflicted and purified. With diligence, virtue is generated and nonvirtue is abandoned. Thus, there are four right exertions: the abandonment of nonvirtue that has arisen within the three gateways; not generating that which has yet to arise; the further enhancement of virtuous practices that have arisen within the three gateways; and the generation of those which have yet to arise. Due to being the cause and support for supernormal abilities, such as traveling through the sky, the four foundations of supernormal ability are named as such. Through intent, a fierce intent is roused; through diligence, one is swift in accomplishment; through mind, whatever is wished for is achieved; and through analysis, whatever result is enjoyed. The "path of accumulation" is named as such due to its gathering of bountiful accumulations. One exerts power over the generation of virtues conducive to liberation within the mental continuum of a mind rendered malleable through the power of the fivefold grouping of faith and so on. For this reason, there are five powers; one obtains power over faith, diligence, mindfulness, samādhi, and wisdom. Through prolonged cultivation of these five powers, the following five-lack of faith, laziness, impaired mindfulness, distraction, and inattentiveness-will be unable to form obstacles. Thus, there are five strengths that generate the capacities of faith and so on. The "path of joining" is named as such because via heat, peak, forbearance, and the supreme quality one joins with the path of seeing. The apprehended object's lack of intrinsic nature constitutes heat, for it is held to burn away the tinder of afflictions through the path of the noble ones. With confidence in this, it forms the peak of the roots of virtue, and thus it is the peak. There is forbearance of the apprehender lacking intrinsic nature and forbearance of contaminated arising and perishing. With confidence in this, one thus attains to the supreme quality, which is superior to other worldly qualities. Because reality becomes a cause for awakening on the path of seeing, it consists of seven branches of awakening. Here, there is the branch of awakening of right mindfulness, which does not forget its focal referent; the branch of awakening of the discernment of phenomena, as they are and in their multiplicity; the branch of awakening of diligence to go beyond saṃsāra; the branch of awakening of joy, which serves the welfare of body, speech, and mind; the branch of awakening of pliancy, which consists of mental malleability; the branch of awakening of samādhi, where the mind rests evenly upon a single point, free from grasping; and the branch of awakening of equanimity, which is accompanied by the attainment of a joy that is free from hope and fear in respect of all things. The "path of seeing" is named as such because what was previously unseen is seen. The eightfold path of the noble ones brings forth the attainment of the result of an arhat. With right view, the path of seeing is made manifest; with right thought, one does not speak without understanding; with right speech, one teaches the Dharma to those whom it will tame; with right action, one does not act otherwise, engaging in improper deeds; with right livelihood, one does no harm either to oneself or to others, and is untainted by afflictions; with right effort, one accomplishes uncompounded phenomena; with right mindfulness, the nonvirtues of minds and mental states will find no opportunity; with right samādhi, one knows all things with the primordial wisdom possessed of an instant of mind, and it is through such primordial wisdom that one is fully awakened. The "path of cultivation" is named as such because it involves repeatedly familiarizing oneself with the true nature of reality. If connected to the ten grounds, the first is the path of seeing, and the second through the eighth are the path of cultivation. From practice through conviction to the first ground, outside of accomplishing one's own benefit one is unable to effect the benefit of others, for one is oneself not free of afflictions. From the second to the eighth ground, the benefit of both is carried out, for one is free from manifest afflictions, though they persist in latency. From the ninth to the tenth, one exclusively acts for the benefit of others. Indeed, since the afflictions as well as their seeds are discarded, there is no need to act for one's own benefit. The ninth and tenth grounds form the path of no further training, for they are explained to dispense with the phase of the path of training. Alternating Meditation and the Samādhis of the Nine Absorptions In the Mother, we find the following: Accompanied by conceptualization and analysis is the first concentration. Without conceptualization but with analysis alone is the second concentration. Mental engagement with neither conceptualization nor analysis is the third concentration. Mental engagement of joy and withdrawal is the fourth concentration. Regarding the fourth concentration, if by alternating the uncontaminated wisdom of the noble ones one meditates in five stages, one will take birth in the five pure abodes, Avṛha and so on. Here, alternating the first concentration and the fourth is lesser; alternating the fourth based on the combination of the first and second is middling; alternating the three of the first, second, and third, with the fourth is great; alternating each subdivision of the four concentrations and the fourth is immensely great; and to perform a skipped meditation in regard to those is supremely great. With respect to skipping, it is done by means of meditating on the fourth, from eschewing some of the four concentrations to leaping over them. Proceeding in ascending order, sequentially and nonsequentially, dispensing with one to three, to discarding in descending order, one meditates on the fourth. Whether understanding or experience, either case constitutes the concentration of an ordinary being's meditation. From the perspective of one who proceeds sequentially, beginning with the approaches to watching the natural state of the mind, this consists of greater one-pointedness and below. The nonconceptual wisdom of the noble ones is precisely that special insight that understands the nine absorptions to be without an inherent nature. The Manner in Which the Samādhis of the Nine Absorptions-the Concentrations, the Formless, and Cessation-Are Born The training of the first concentration is accompanied by a conceptualizing cognition, which instigates settling in equipoise, along with a watchful analysis of the empty luminosity wherein one rests without conceptualizing that in any way whatsoever. Through this, the actualization, which is nonconceptual, is born, while post-session intervals are accompanied by conceptualization and analysis. This is the samādhi of the first concentration. From its pellucid aspect dawns, to a small extent, the exalted eyes and supernormal awareness. Next, the training is the preparatory stage of the stable actualization of that previous mind, which is without conceptualization but accompanied by analysis alone. Absent even a subtle thought that cognizes that too as empty luminosity but accompanied by an experiential apprehension, a luminous yet nonconceptual state is born. This is the actualization, which constitutes the samādhi of the second concentration. Then, from the preparatory stage consisting of the stable actualization of that mind is born a special nonconceptuality that is absent of either conceptualization or analysis. This is the actualization that comprises the samādhi of the third concentration. Finally, the preparatory stage of the fourth concentration again consists of the stable actualization of the prior concentration. Compared to the previous joy and bliss derived from bliss, clarity, and nonconceptuality, from this is born a joy and bliss that are far surpassing. This is the actualization of the fourth concentration. Moreover, for each of these, the stages in their approaches to familiarization form the cause for birth within three respective heavenly abodes in the form realm. These are the twelve abodes of ordinary beings: Bṛhatphala and below. Bṛhatphala's very nature of joy and bliss may stray into mere calm abiding without attaining the radiance of deep luminosity. Should this happen, with the stream of sensory objects having ceased, the pellucid aspect of both the conceptual and nonconceptual will cease, and one will be impelled into the formless realm. There, consciousness whose luminous aspect has abated becomes familiarized with a spacelike, merely empty yet unimpeded nature. This is the sphere of boundless space. Through becoming accustomed to that state, though one places one's attention upon the boundless vivid appearance of mind alone from the perspective of consciousness, the cessation of the pellucid aspect of the six collections is stabilized. Through this, there is boundless consciousness. By familiarizing oneself accordingly, with even the subtle sensation of cognizing as mind alone having dissipated, one does not perceive there to be anything at all. This is the mind of nothingness. And in the same fashion, to abide within a dense nonconceptuality wherein one's attention is placed upon the fact that even the mind that apprehends as nothingness is neither existent nor nonexistent, this is the sphere of neither existent nor nonexistent. This mind constitutes the peak of existence. Whichever of these one becomes accustomed to, having passed away within that state, one will be reborn there. As to cessation, by the halting of pleasant and unpleasant sensations, as well as distinguishing cognitions, the samādhi of cessation is attained. Here, the fifty mental states and eightyfold host of thoughts and so on are permanently brought to cessation, and in that thick darkness the excellent qualities of its aspect of awareness lie dormant. Additionally, there is cessation via investigation by mental analysis and non-investigative cessation, wherein one rests within a nonconceptual state. The concentrations of Bṛhatphala and below are made manifest as mere steps along the path of wisdom, but to be liberated, having embraced their very appearance with authentic, nonconceptual special insight, is a distinction of the noble ones. 
